## Summary

In event-driven architectures, the event sourcing pattern stores the events that result in a state change in a data store. This helps to capture and maintain a complete history of state changes, and promotes auditability, traceability, and the ability to analyze past states.

## Problem

Multiple microservices can collaborate to handle requests, and they communicate through events. These events can result in a change in state (data).

Most applications work with data, and the typical approach is for the application to maintain the current state of the data by updating it as users work with it. For example, in the traditional create, read, update, and delete (CRUD) model a typical data process is to read data from the store, make some modifications to it, and update the current state of the data with the new values—often by using transactions that lock the data.

The CRUD approach has some limitations:

- CRUD systems perform update operations directly against a data store. These operations can slow down performance and responsiveness and can limit scalability, due to the processing overhead it requires.
- In a collaborative domain with many concurrent users, data update conflicts are more likely because the update operations take place on a single item of data.
- Unless there's another auditing mechanism that records the details of each operation in a separate log, history is lost.

## Solution

Instead of storing just the current state of the data in a domain, use an append-only store to record the full series of actions taken on that data. The store acts as the system of record and can be used to materialize the domain objects. This can simplify tasks in complex domains, by avoiding the need to synchronize the data model and the business domain, while improving performance, scalability, and responsiveness. It can also provide consistency for transactional data, and maintain full audit trails and history that can enable compensating actions.

The Event Sourcing pattern defines an approach to handling operations on data that's driven by a sequence of events, each of which is recorded in an append-only store. Application code sends a series of events that imperatively describe each action that has occurred on the data to the event store, where they're persisted. Each event represents a set of changes to the data (such as AddedItemToOrder).

The events are persisted in an event store that acts as the system of record (the authoritative data source) about the current state of the data. The event store typically publishes these events so that consumers can be notified and can handle them if needed. Consumers could, for example, initiate tasks that apply the operations in the events to other systems, or perform any other associated action that's required to complete the operation. Notice that the application code that generates the events is decoupled from the systems that subscribe to the events.

Typical uses of the events published by the event store are to maintain materialized views of entities as actions in the application change them, and for integration with external systems. For example, a system can maintain a materialized view of all customer orders that's used to populate parts of the UI. The application adds new orders, adds or removes items on the order, and adds shipping information. The events that describe these changes can be handled and used to update the [materialized view](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/architecture/patterns/materialized-view).

At any point, it's possible for applications to read the history of events. You can then use it to materialize the current state of an entity by playing back and consuming all the events that are related to that entity. This process can occur on demand to materialize a domain object when handling a request. Or, the process occurs through a scheduled task so that the state of the entity can be stored as a materialized view, to support the presentation layer.

## Rationale

- Events are immutable and can be stored using an append-only operation. The user interface, workflow, or process that initiated an event can continue, and tasks that handle the events can run in the background. This process, combined with the fact that there's no contention during the processing of transactions, can vastly improve performance and scalability for applications, especially for the presentation level or user interface.
- Events are simple objects that describe some action that occurred, together with any associated data that's required to describe the action represented by the event. Events don't directly update a data store. They're simply recorded for handling at the appropriate time. Using events can simplify implementation and management.
- Events typically have meaning for a domain expert, whereas object-relational impedance mismatch can make complex database tables hard to understand. Tables are artificial constructs that represent the current state of the system, not the events that occurred.
- Event sourcing can help prevent concurrent updates from causing conflicts because it avoids the requirement to directly update objects in the data store. However, the domain model must still be designed to protect itself from requests that might result in an inconsistent state.
- The append-only storage of events provides an audit trail that can be used to monitor actions taken against a data store. It can regenerate the current state as materialized views or projections by replaying the events at any time, and it can assist in testing and debugging the system. In addition, the requirement to use compensating events to cancel changes can provide a history of changes that were reversed. This capability wouldn't be the case if the model stored the current state. The list of events can also be used to analyze application performance and to detect user behavior trends. Or, it can be used to obtain other useful business information.
    - Point-in time reconstruction of the application state is needed.
- The event store raises events, and tasks perform operations in response to those events. This decoupling of the tasks from the events provides flexibility and extensibility. Tasks know about the type of event and the event data, but not about the operation that triggered the event. In addition, multiple tasks can handle each event. This enables easy integration with other services and systems that only listen for new events raised by the event store. However, the event sourcing events tend to be very low level, and it might be necessary to generate specific integration events instead.
- Event sourcing is commonly combined with the CQRS pattern by performing the data management tasks in response to the events, and by materializing views from the stored events

## Trade Offs

- **Optimistic concurrency control:** This pattern stores every event that causes a state change in the system. Multiple users or services can try to update the same piece of data at the same time, causing event collisions. These collisions happen when conflicting events are created and applied at the same time, which results in a final data state that doesn't match reality. To solve this issue, you can implement strategies to detect and resolve event collisions. For example, you can implement an optimistic concurrency control scheme by including versioning or by adding timestamps to events to track the order of updates.
- **Complexity:** Implementing event sourcing necessitates a shift in mindset from traditional CRUD operations to event-driven thinking. The replay process, which is used to restore the system to its original state, can be complex in order to ensure data idempotency. Event storage, backups, and snapshots can also add additional complexity.
- **Eventual consistency**: Data projections derived from the events are eventually consistent because of the latency in updating data by using the command query responsibility segregation (CQRS) pattern or materialized views. When consumers process data from an event store and publishers send new data, the data projection or the application object might not represent the current state.
- **Querying**: Retrieving current or aggregate data from event logs can be more intricate and slower compared to traditional databases, particularly for complex queries and reporting tasks. To mitigate this issue, event sourcing is often implemented with the CQRS pattern.
- **Size and cost of the event store:** The event store can experience exponential growth in size as events are continuously persisted, especially in systems that have high event throughput or extended retention periods. Consequently, you must periodically archive event data to cost-effective storage to prevent the event store from becoming too large.
- **Scalability of the event store:** The event store must efficiently handle high volumes of both write and read operations. Scaling an event store can be challenging, so it's important to have a data store that provides shards and partitions.
- **Efficiency and optimization**: Choose or design an event store that handles both write and read operations efficiently. The event store should be optimized for the expected event volume and query patterns for the application. Implementing indexing and query mechanisms can speed up the retrieval of events when reconstructing the application state. You can also consider using specialized event store databases or libraries that offer query optimization features.
- **Snapshots:** You must back up event logs at regular intervals with time-based activation. Replaying the events on the last known successful backup of the data should lead to point-in-time recovery of the application state. The recovery point objective (RPO) is the maximum acceptable amount of time since the last data recovery point. RPO determines what is considered an acceptable loss of data between the last recovery point and the interruption of service. The frequency of the daily snapshots of the data and event store should be based on the RPO for the application.
- **Time sensitivity:** The events are stored in the order in which they occur. Therefore, network reliability is an important factor to consider when you implement this pattern. Latency issues can lead to an incorrect system state. Use first in, first out (FIFO) queues with at-most-once delivery to carry the events to the event store.
- **Event replay performance**: Replaying a substantial number of events to reconstruct the current application state can be time-consuming. Optimization efforts are required to enhance performance, particularly when replaying events from archived data.
- **External system updates:** Applications that use the event sourcing pattern might update data stores in external systems, and might capture these updates as event objects. During event replays, this might become an issue if the external system doesn't expect an update. In such cases, you can use feature flags to control external system updates.
- **External system queries:** When external system calls are sensitive to the date and time of the call, the received data can be stored in internal data stores for use during replays.
- **Event versioning:** As the application evolves, the structure of the events (schema) can change. Implementing a versioning strategy for events to ensure backward and forward compatibility is necessary. This can involve including a version field in the event payload and handling different event versions appropriately during replay.